New PSR for ClockInterface (#1224)
php-fig/fig-standards: proposed/clock-meta.md

# Clock Meta Document

## 1. Summary

The purpose of using the `ClockInterface` is to provide a standard way to access the system 
time, that would allow interopability when testing code that relies on the current time 
rather than relying on installing PHP extensions or use hacks like re-declaring the `time()`
function in other namespaces. 

## 2. Why Bother?

> There are currently a few libraries that do provide this functionality on packagist, however 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There are currently a few libraries that provide this functionality, however 
```

there is no interopability between these different libraries, as they ship with their own 

> clock interfaces. Symfony provides a package callsed `symfony/phpunit-bridge` that has a

Reviewer: ```suggestion
clock interfaces. Symfony provides a package called `symfony/phpunit-bridge` that has a
```

`Symfony\Bridge\PhpUnit\ClockMock` class, which allows mocking PHP's built-in time & date 
functions, however this does not solve mocking calls to `new \DateTimeImmutable()`. It does
not fully mock time when called from other libraries that rely on the system time. 

> `Cake\Chronos\Chronos` does provide mocking, hwoever it is set via a global (static class 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
`Cake\Chronos\Chronos` does provide mocking, however it is set via a global (static class 
```

property), and this has its own pitfalls as it provides no isolation.

Pros:

* Consistent interface to get the current time;
* Easy to mock the wall clock time for repeatablility.

Cons:

* Extra overhead and developer effort to get the current time, not as simple as
calling `time()` or `date()`.

## 3. Scope

### 3.1 Goals

* Provide a simple and mockable way to read the current time;

> * Allow interoperability between libraries when reading the clock.

Reviewer: Not sure, do we need a trailing `;` or `.` here? If so, perhaps consistently use one?

Author: Not sure, perhaps @ashnazg can weight in on this?

`time()`, `date()`, `microtime()`, etc functions, however this does not solve mocking calls to 
`new \DateTime()`

Pros:

* Consistent interface to get the current time
* Easy to mock the wall clock time for repeatablility.

Cons:

* Extra overhead and developer effort to get the current time, not as simple as
calling `time()` or `date()`.

## 3. Scope

### 3.1 Goals

* Provide a simple and mockable way to read the current time
* Allow interoperability between libraries when reading the clock

### 3.2 Non-Goals

* This PSR does not provide a recommendation on how and when to use the concepts
  described in this document, so it is not a coding standard.
* This PSR does not provide a reccomendation on how to handle timezones when 
  retrieving the current time. This is left up to the implementation.

## 4. Approaches

### 4.1 Chosen Approach

We have decided to formalize the existing practices, use by several other packages
out in the wild. Some of the popular packages providing this functionality are: 
lcobucci/clock, kreait/clock, ergebnis/clock, and mangoweb/clock. Some providing
interfaces, and some relying on overloading (extending) the Clock class to mock the
current time.

> ### 4.2 Example Implemntations

Reviewer 3: ```diff
- ### 4.2 Example Implemntations
+ ### 4.2 Example Implementations
```

> # PHPDoc Meta Document

Reviewer 4: This article is not for [PHPDoc](https://github.com/php-fig/fig-standards/blob/master/proposed/phpdoc-meta.md).
Maybe replaced by "Clock Meta Document", like [Container Meta Document](https://github.com/php-fig/fig-standards/blob/master/accepted/PSR-11-container-meta.md).

> # PHPDoc Meta Document

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
# Clock Meta Document
```

## 1. Summary

> The purpose of using the ClockInterface is to provide a standard way to access the system 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The purpose of using the `ClockInterface` is to provide a standard way to access the system 
```

time, that would allow interopability when testing code that relies on the current time 

> rather than relying installing PHP extensions or use hacks like re-declaring the time() 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
rather than relying installing PHP extensions or use hacks like re-declaring the `time()`
```

function in other namespaces. 

## 2. Why Bother?

There are currently a few libraries that do provide the functionality on packagist, however 
there is no interopability between these different libraries, as they ship with their own 

> clock interfaces. Symfony has a TimeMock library which uses namespace hacks to override the 

Reviewer: Note: Symfony does not have a TimeMock library. Symfony provide a package named `symfony/phpunit-bridge` with a `Symfony\Bridge\PhpUnit\ClockMock` class:

> The `Symfony\Bridge\PhpUnit\ClockMock` class provided by this bridge allows you to mock the PHP’s built-in time functions `time()`, `microtime()`, `sleep()`, `usleep()` and `gmdate()`. Additionally the function `date()` is mocked so it uses the mocked time if no timestamp is specified.
>
>Other functions with an optional timestamp parameter that defaults to `time()` will still use the system time instead of the mocked time. This means that you may need to change some code in your tests. For example, instead of new `DateTime()`, you should use `DateTime::createFromFormat('U', time())` to use the mocked `time()` function.

For reference, see 

- https://symfony.com/doc/current/components/phpunit_bridge.html#clock-mocking
- https://github.com/symfony/phpunit-bridge/blob/v5.2.4/ClockMock.php

Author: I have updated this to be more accurate

`time()`, `date()`, `microtime()`, etc functions, however this does not solve mocking calls to 
`new \DateTime()`

Pros:

> * Consistent interface to get the current time

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Consistent interface to get the current time;
```

* Easy to mock the wall clock time for repeatablility.

Cons:

* Extra overhead and developer effort to get the current time, not as simple as
calling `time()` or `date()`.

## 3. Scope

### 3.1 Goals

> * Provide a simple and mockable way to read the current time

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Provide a simple and mockable way to read the current time;
```

> * Allow interoperability between libraries when reading the clock

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Allow interoperability between libraries when reading the clock.
```

### 3.2 Non-Goals

* This PSR does not provide a recommendation on how and when to use the concepts

>   described in this document, so it is not a coding standard.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  described in this document, so it is not a coding standard;
```

* This PSR does not provide a recommendation on how to handle timezones when 
  retrieving the current time. This is left up to the implementation.

## 4. Approaches

### 4.1 Chosen Approach

> We have decided to formalize the existing practices, use by several other packages

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have decided to formalize the existing practices, used by several other packages
```

out in the wild. Some of the popular packages providing this functionality are: 

> lcobucci/clock, kreait/clock, ergebnis/clock, and mangoweb/clock. Some providing

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`lcobucci/clock`, `kreait/clock`, `ergebnis/clock`, and `mangoweb/clock`. Some providing
```

interfaces, and some relying on overloading (extending) the Clock class to mock the

> current time.

Reviewer 6: What `Clock class` is it referring to?

Author: Like the wall clock - getting the current system time

### 4.2 Example Implemntations

```php

> final class TimeZoneAwareClock implements \Psr\Clock\ClockInterface

Reviewer 6: I definitely feel very uncomfortable with this `TimeZoneAwareClock` as the first implementation shown as an example.

It feels like the normal case to implement it would be to provide a timezone, while this is a very bad practice to promote. time-zone-based code leads to a code you can't scale easily worldwide, you can't easily move consistently to an other place, not easily re-use.

We should show first the `UTCClock` then simply show that timezone can be changed on the returned object:

```php
$universalNow = (new UTCClock())->now();
$nowForMyChicagoUser = $universalNow->setTimezone(new DateTimeZone('America/Chicago'));
```

And we should encourage to use the first one to do any back-end stuff or calculation, while reserving the second kind only for the very output to be displayed to an end user.

Reviewer: @kylekatarnls

Why not inject the timezone via constructor?

```php
final class SystemClock implements Clock
{
    private \DateTimeZone $timezone;

    public function __construct(\DateTimeZone $timezone)
    {
        $this->timezone = $timezone;
    }

    public function now(): \DateTimeImmutable
    {
        return new \DateTimeImmutable(
            'now',
            $this->timezone
        );
    }

    public function freeze(): FrozenClock
    {
        return new FrozenClock($this->now());
    }
}
```

See https://github.com/ergebnis/clock/blob/2.2.0/src/SystemClock.php#L16-L37.

Reviewer 6: I don't see the point this is exactly the same as the current proposal for `TimeZoneAwareClock` and showing this to people is the same as promoting "You can use any timezone for your clock". AND. THAT'S. NOT. GOOD.

As the person who might have to call `->now()` on an object implementing `ClockInterface` I want to get something reliable, not something in unknown, dynamic or even just some hard coded city timezone name.

If someone want a timezone they can do it outside of the clock using `->setTimezone()` and as this PSR says it's not aimed to say how to deal with timezone, then it should not show clocks that handle it internally.

Sure users still will be able to do it. But we should encourage them to do it outside the clock. So you give the clock only the responsibility to tick the moment, then give to some other service the responsibility to tell you what numbers are given to this tick in a given timezone.

Reviewer 7: You get something very reliable: A `DateTimeImmutable` Object that represents the current time!

What you will never be able to tell is, whether the current time was observed in Cairo, Sydney, Lima or London. That is something that your own business logic needs to handle anyhow.

The whole `ClockInterface` will be completely timezone agnostic.

Reviewer 8: Throwing my opinion in here since we’re still going back and forth on timezones.

+1 to encouraging UTC and leaving timezone manipulation to app implementation.  IMHO if someone needs this they can create their own interface, the PSR should enforce best practice whenever possible.

Reviewer 7: This PSR is timezone-agnostic.

Therefore we should **not** encourage anything in regards to UTC or any other timezone. 

BestPractices in timezone-handling is to use `DateTimeImmutable` which we are enforcing. The internals of that `DateTieImmutable`-Instance are not our business.

Reviewer 8: Perfect, thanks @heiglandreas

{

>     private DateTimeZone $timeZone;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    private \DateTimeZone $timeZone;
```

Reviewer 2: While I fully understand this change request, I'm wondering if we shouldn't use a proper `use` statement instead.

>     public function __construct(DateTimeZone $timeZone)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    public function __construct(\DateTimeZone $timeZone)
```

    {
        $this->timeZone = $timeZone;
    }

    public function now(): \DateTimeImmutable
    {

>         return new DateTimeImmutable('now', $this->timeZone);

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        return new \DateTimeImmutable('now', $this->timeZone);
```

    }
}

//

final class SystemClock implements \Psr\Clock\ClockInterface
{

> 

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
```

Author: Hey Kyle, are you able to participate in the working group to develop a standard around this?

    public function now(): \DateTimeImmutable
    {
        return new \DateTimeImmutable();
    }
}

//

final class UTCClock implements \Psr\Clock\ClockInterface
{
    private TimeZoneAwareClock $inner;

    public function __construct()
    {

>         $this->inner = new TimeZoneAwareClock(new DateTimeZone('UTC'));

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        $this->inner = new TimeZoneAwareClock(new \DateTimeZone('UTC'));
```

    }

    public function now(): \DateTimeImmutable
    {
        return $this->inner->now();
    }
}

//

final class FrozenClock implements \Psr\Clock\ClockInterface
{

>     private DateTimeImmutable $now;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    private \DateTimeImmutable $now;
```

>     public function __construct(DateTimeImmutable $now)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    public function __construct(\DateTimeImmutable $now)
```

    {
        $this->now = $now;
    }

    public function now(): \DateTimeImmutable
    {

>         return $this->now;

Reviewer 7: Should this not be `return clone($this->now);`

I know, it's a minor detail, but any call to `now()` should return a new `DateTimeImmutable` Object, even in a frozen clock.

Reviewer: @heiglandreas

Why?

It's a value object, so why bother returning different instances with the same value?

Reviewer 6: In unit test:
```php
$someObject->updatedAt = $clock->now();
```
Now if you try to compare `$someObject` old state property values with new ones using `===`, the test will assert the object is untouched. That may lead to wrong results.

So I guess the `(clone) $this->now` can make it a bit safer.

Reviewer 7: That was my reasoning. Each call to `now()` should return a *new* ValueObject IMO (whether the content is the same is a different story)

> final class TimeZoneAwareClock implements \Psr\Clock\ClockInterface
> {
>     private DateTimeZone $timeZone;
> 
>     public function __construct(DateTimeZone $timeZone)
>     {
>         $this->timeZone = $timeZone;
>     }
> 
>     public function now(): \DateTimeImmutable
>     {
>         return new DateTimeImmutable('now', $this->timeZone);
>     }
> }
> 
> //
> 
> final class SystemClock implements \Psr\Clock\ClockInterface
> {
> 
>     public function now(): \DateTimeImmutable
>     {
>         return new \DateTimeImmutable();
>     }
> }
> 
> //
> 
> final class UTCClock implements \Psr\Clock\ClockInterface
> {
>     private TimeZoneAwareClock $inner;
> 
>     public function __construct()
>     {
>         $this->inner = new TimeZoneAwareClock(new DateTimeZone('UTC'));
>     }
> 
>     public function now(): \DateTimeImmutable
>     {
>         return $this->inner->now();
>     }
> }
> 
> //
> 
> final class FrozenClock implements \Psr\Clock\ClockInterface
> {
>     private DateTimeImmutable $now;
>     
>     public function __construct(DateTimeImmutable $now)
>     {
>         $this->now = $now;
>     }
> 
>     public function now(): \DateTimeImmutable
>     {
>         return $this->now;
>     }
> }
> ```

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
\`\`\`php
use DateTimeImmutable;
use DateTimeZone;
use Psr\Clock\ClockInterface;

final class UTCClock implements ClockInterface
{
    public function now(): DateTimeImmutable
    {
        return new DateTimeImmutable('now', new DateTimeZone('UTC'));
    }
}

//

final class FrozenClock implements ClockInterface
{
    private DateTimeImmutable $now;
    
    public function __construct(DateTimeImmutable $now)
    {
        $this->now = $now;
    }

    public function now(): DateTimeImmutable
    {
        return $this->now;
    }
}
\`\`\`

While the `ClockInterface` does not strictly forbid to return `DateTimeImmutable` object with any timezone, we strongly recommend to use `UTC` as the default, you should refrain from either relying on default timezone which is dependent on OS settings or on a (e.g. do not use `new DateTimeImmutable()` without `new DateTimeZone('UTC')`).

And instead of having a clock with a dynamic timezone or multiple clock, simply rely on a common entry point and change the timezone on need:
\`\`\`php
$clock = new UTCClock();
$universalNow = $clock->now();
$nowForMyChicagoUser = $universalNow->setTimezone(new DateTimeZone('America/Chicago'));
\`\`\`

And the given `FrozenClock` can help you to mock "now":
\`\`\`php
$clock = new FrozenClock(new DateTimeImmutable('2039-01-02 10:00', new DateTimeZone('UTC')));
\`\`\`
```

## 5. People

### 5.1 Editor

 * Chris Seufert

### 5.2 Sponsor

 * Chuck Burgess

### 5.3 Working group members

 * Pol Dellaiera
 * Ben Edmunds
 * Jérôme Gamez
 * Andreas Heigl
 * Andreas Möller
 * Luís Cobucci

## 6. Votes

* 

> ## 7. Relevant Links
> * https://github.com/ergebnis/clock/blob/main/src/Clock.php

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## 7. Relevant Links

* https://github.com/ergebnis/clock/blob/main/src/Clock.php
```

# Clock Meta Document

## 1. Summary

The purpose of using the `ClockInterface` is to provide a standard way to access the system 
time, that would allow interopability when testing code that relies on the current time 

> rather than relying installing PHP extensions or use hacks like re-declaring the `time()`

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
rather than relying on installing PHP extensions or use hacks like re-declaring the `time()`
```

> rather than relying installing PHP extensions or use hacks like re-declaring the `time()`

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
rather than relying on installing PHP extensions or using hacks like re-declaring the `time()`
```

function in other namespaces. 

## 2. Why Bother?

> There are currently a few libraries that do provide the functionality on packagist, however 

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
There are currently a few libraries that do provide this functionality on packagist, however 
```

there is no interopability between these different libraries, as they ship with their own 
clock interfaces. Symfony has a TimeMock library which uses namespace hacks to override the 

> `time()`, `date()`, `microtime()`, etc functions, however this does not solve mocking calls to 

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
`time()`, `date()`, `microtime()`, etc. functions, however this does not solve mocking calls to 
```

> `new \DateTime()`

Reviewer 9: ```suggestion
`new \DateTime()`.
```

current time.

### 4.2 Example Implementations

```php
final class TimeZoneAwareClock implements \Psr\Clock\ClockInterface
{
    private \DateTimeZone $timeZone;

    public function __construct(\DateTimeZone $timeZone)
    {
        $this->timeZone = $timeZone;
    }

    public function now(): \DateTimeImmutable
    {
        return new \DateTimeImmutable('now', $this->timeZone);
    }
}

//

final class SystemClock implements \Psr\Clock\ClockInterface
{

    public function now(): \DateTimeImmutable
    {
        return new \DateTimeImmutable();
    }
}

//

final class UTCClock implements \Psr\Clock\ClockInterface
{
    private TimeZoneAwareClock $inner;

    public function __construct()
    {
        $this->inner = new TimeZoneAwareClock(new \DateTimeZone('UTC'));
    }

    public function now(): \DateTimeImmutable
    {
        return $this->inner->now();
    }
}

//

final class FrozenClock implements \Psr\Clock\ClockInterface
{
    private \DateTimeImmutable $now;
    
    public function __construct(\DateTimeImmutable $now)
    {
        $this->now = $now;
    }

    public function now(): \DateTimeImmutable
    {

>         return $this->now;

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
        return clone $this->now;
```

    }
}
```

## 5. People

### 5.1 Editor

 * Chris Seufert

### 5.2 Sponsor

 * Chuck Burgess

### 5.3 Working group members

 * Pol Dellaiera
 * Ben Edmunds
 * Jérôme Gamez
 * Andreas Heigl
 * Andreas Möller

>  * Luís Cobucci

Reviewer: @cseufert 

What’s the order here?

Author: totally random really, any suggestions?

Reviewer 10: Alphabetically would be my first choice

Reviewer 7: Alphabetical by last name. Move Luís Cobucci to the beginning and we're done ;-)

Author: Done

## 6. Votes

* 

## 7. Relevant Links

* https://github.com/ergebnis/clock/blob/main/src/Clock.php
* https://github.com/icecave/chrono/blob/master/src/Clock/ClockInterface.php
* https://github.com/Kdyby/DateTimeProvider/blob/master/src/DateTimeProviderInterface.php
* https://github.com/kreait/clock-php/blob/main/src/Clock.php
* https://github.com/lcobucci/clock/blob/2.1.x/src/Clock.php
* https://github.com/mangoweb-backend/clock/blob/master/src/Clock.php
* https://martinfowler.com/bliki/ClockWrapper.html

## 8. Past contributors

> Since this document stems from the work of a lot of people in previous years, we should recognize their effort:

Reviewer 8: ```suggestion
This document stems from the work of many people in previous years, we recognize their effort:
```

# PHPDoc Meta Document

## 1. Summary

> The purpose of using the ClockInterface would allow mocking time in many situations where

Reviewer: Not sure if "mocking time" is the purpose.

I think it is worth mentioning @martinfowler's article here: https://martinfowler.com/bliki/ClockWrapper.html.

Author: Thanks, i have added it to the links

you can't easily install PHP extensions or use hacks like re-declaring the time() function
in other namespaces.

## 2. Why Bother?

There are currently a few libraries that do provide the functionality on packagist, however 

> there is no interopability between these different libraries, as they ship with thier own 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
there is no interopability between these different libraries, as they ship with their own 
```

> clock interfaces. Symphony has a TimeMock library which uses namespace hacks to override the 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
clock interfaces. Symfony has a TimeMock library which uses namespace hacks to override the 
```

`time()`, `date()`, `microtime()`, etc functions, however this does not solve mocking calls to 
`new \DateTime()`

Pros:

* Consistent interface to get the current time
* Easy to mock the wall clock time for repeatablility.

Cons:

* Extra overhead and developer effort to get the current time, not as simple as
calling `time()` or `date()`.

## 3. Scope

### 3.1 Goals

> * Provide a simple and mockable way to read the current time

Reviewer: See https://martinfowler.com/bliki/ClockWrapper.html.

* Allow interoperability between libraries when reading the clock

### 3.2 Non-Goals

* This PSR does not provide a recommendation on how and when to use the concepts described in this document, so it is
  not a coding standard.
* This PSR does not provide a reccomendation on how to handle timezones when retrieving the current time.

## 4. Approaches

### 4.1 Chosen Approach

We have decided to formalize the existing practices, use by several other packages out in the wild. Some of the popular
packages providing this functionality are: lcobucci/clock, kreait/clock, ergebnis/clock, and mangoweb/clock. Some 
providing interfaces, some relying on overloading a class to mock the current time.

## 5. People

### 5.1 Editor

 * Chris Seufert

### 5.2 Sponsor

 * 

### 5.3 Working group members

 * 

## 6. Votes

* 

## 7. Relevant Links

* https://github.com/lcobucci/clock/blob/2.1.x/src/Clock.php
* https://github.com/kreait/clock-php/blob/main/src/Clock.php
* https://github.com/ergebnis/clock/blob/main/src/Clock.php
* https://github.com/mangoweb-backend/clock/blob/master/src/Clock.php
* https://github.com/icecave/chrono/blob/master/src/Clock/ClockInterface.php

> * https://github.com/Kdyby/DateTimeProvider/blob/master/src/DateTimeProviderInterface.php

Reviewer: Unless the order is important, perhaps use alphabetical order?

Author: Currently the order is my most used on packagist. But at the end of the day, that order will change over time anyway, so yes, I will re-order it.

# PHPDoc Meta Document

## 1. Summary

The purpose of using the ClockInterface would allow mocking time in many situations where

> you cant easily install PHP extenions or use hacks like re-declaring the time() funciton

Reviewer 11: Suggestion for typo fix:
```suggestion
you can't easily install PHP extensions or use hacks like re-declaring the time() function
```

> you cant easily install PHP extenions or use hacks like re-declaring the time() funciton

Reviewer 12: Typo in "funciton"

in other namespaces.

## 2. Why Bother?

There are currently a few libraries that do provide the functionality on packagist, however 
there is no interopability between these different libraries, as they ship with thier own 
clock interfaces. Symphony has a TimeMock library which uses namespace hacks to override the 
`time()`, `date()`, `microtime()`, etc functions, however this does not solve mocking calls to 
`new \DateTime()`

Pros:

* Consistent interface to get the current time
* Easy to mock the wall clock time for repeatablility.

Cons:

> * Extra overhead and developer effor to get the current time, not as simple as

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
* Extra overhead and developer effort to get the current time, not as simple as
```

calling `time()` or `date()`.

## 3. Scope

### 3.1 Goals

> * Provide a simple way mockable way to read the current time

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
* Provide a simple and mockable way to read the current time
```

> * Allow interopability between libraries when reading the clock

Reviewer 11: ```suggestion
* Allow interoperability between libraries when reading the clock
```

final class UTCClock implements \Psr\Clock\ClockInterface
{

>     private \DateTimeZone $utcTimeZone;

Reviewer 2: Is there a particular reason to not use a proper `use` statement on the top of the file?

Author: Its not really a file, just some example implementations, this makes they very copy+paste-able.

Reviewer 2: Ok fair enough.
